Meditations
René Descartes
Third Meditation
Third Meditation:
God
[
Before we move on, a translation matter should be confronted. It con-
cerns the Latin adjectives
clarus
and
distinctus
the corresponding French adjectives
clair
and
distinct
and the corresponding English adjectives
‘vivid’ and ‘clear’.
Every other translator of this work into English has put
‘clear’ and ‘distinct’
and for a while the present translator in cowardly fashion followed suit.
But the usual translation is simply wrong, and we ought to free ourselves
from it. The crucial point concerns
clarus
(and everything said about that
here is equally true of the French
clair
). The word can mean ‘clear’ in our
sense, and when Descartes uses it
outside
the
clarus et distinctus
phrase,
it seems usually to be in that sense. But
in
that phrase he uses
clarus
in its other meaning—its more common meaning in Latin—of ‘bright’ or
‘vivid’ or the like, as in
clara lux
= ‘broad daylight’. If in the phrase
clarus
et distinctus
Descartes meant
clarus
in its lesser meaning of ‘clear’, then
what is there left for ‘distinctus’ to mean? Descartes doesn’t explain
these terms here, but in his
Principles of Philosophy
1:45–6 he does
so—in a manner that completely condemns the usual translation. He
writes: ‘I call a perception
claram
when it is present and accessible to
the attentive mind—just as we say that we see something
clare
when
it is present to the eye’s gaze and stimulates it with a sufficient degree
of strength and accessibility. I call a perception
distinctam
if, as well
as being
clara
, it is so sharply separated from all other perceptions that
every part of it is
clarum
.. . . . The example of pain shows that a perception
can be
clara
without being
distincta
but not vice versa. When for example
someone feels an intense pain, his perception of it is
clarissima
, but it
isn’t always clear, because people often get this perception muddled with
an obscure judgment they make about something that they think exists
in the painful spot. . . .’ and so on. Of course he is not saying anything
as stupid as that intense pain is always
clear
! His point is that pain is
vivid, up-front, not shady or obscure. And for an idea to be
distincta
is
for every nook and cranny of it to be vivid; which is not a bad way of
saying that it is in our sense ‘clear’.
]
I will now shut my eyes, block my ears, cut off all my
senses. I will regard all my mental images of bodily things
as empty, false and worthless (if I could, I would clear them
out of my mind altogether). I will get into conversation with
myself, examine myself more deeply, and try in this way
gradually to know myself more intimately. I am a thing
that thinks, i.e that doubts, affirms, denies, understands
some things, is ignorant of many others, wills, and refuses.
This thing also imagines and has sensory perceptions; for,
as I remarked before, even if the
objects
of my sensory
experience and imagination don’t exist outside me, still
sensory perception and imagination themselves, considered
simply as
mental
events, certainly do occur in me.
That lists everything that I truly know, or at least every-
thing I have, up to now, discovered that I know. Now I will
look more carefully to see whether I have overlooked other
facts about myself.
I am certain that I am a thinking thing
.
Doesn’t that tell me what it takes for me to be certain about
anything? In this first item of knowledge there is simply
a vivid and clear perception of what I am asserting; this
wouldn’t be enough to make me certain of its truth if it could
ever turn out that something that I perceived so vividly and
clearly was false. So I now seem to be able to lay it down as a
general rule that
whatever I perceive very vividly and clearly
is true
.
9
Meditations
René Descartes
Third Meditation
I previously accepted as perfectly certain and evident
many things that I afterwards realized were doubtful—the
earth, sky, stars, and everything else that I took in through
the senses—but in those cases what I perceived clearly were
merely the ideas or thoughts of those things that came into
my mind; and I am still not denying that those ideas occur
within me. But I used also to believe that my ideas came from
things outside that resembled them in all respects. Indeed, I
believed this for so long that I wrongly came to think that I
perceived it clearly. In fact, it was false; or anyway if it was
true it was not thanks to the strength of my perceptions.
But what about when I was considering something simple
and straightforward in arithmetic or geometry, for example
that two plus three makes five? Didn’t I see these things
clearly enough to accept them as true? Indeed, the only
reason I could find for doubting them was this: Perhaps
some God could have made me so as to be deceived even in
those matters that seemed most obvious. Whenever I bring
to mind my old belief in the supreme power of God, I have
to admit that God could, if he wanted to, easily make me go
wrong even about things that I think I see perfectly clearly.
But when I turn my thought onto the things themselves—the
ones I think I perceive clearly—I find them so convincing that
I spontaneously exclaim: ‘Let him do his best to deceive me!
He will never bring it about that I am nothing while I think I
am something; or make it true in the future that I have never
existed, given that I do now exist; or bring it about that two
plus three make more or less than five, or anything else like
this in which I see a plain contradiction.’ Also, since I have
no evidence that there is a deceiving God, and don’t even
know for sure that there is a God at all, the reason for doubt
that depends purely on this supposition of a deceiving God
is a very slight and theoretical one. However, I shall want to
remove even this slight reason for doubt; so when I get the
opportunity I shall examine whether there is a God, and (if
there is) whether he can be a deceiver. If I don’t settle this, it
seems, then I can never be
quite
certain about anything else.
First, if I am to proceed in an orderly way I should classify
my thoughts into definite kinds, and ask which kinds can
properly be said to be true or false. Some of my thoughts are,
so to speak, images or pictures of things—as when I think of
a man, or a chimera, or the sky, or an angel, or God— and
strictly speaking these are the only thoughts that should be
called ‘ideas’. Other thoughts have more to them than that:
for example when I will, or am afraid, or affirm, or deny, my
thought represents some particular thing but it also includes
something more than merely the likeness of that thing. Some
thoughts in this category are called volitions or emotions,
while others are called judgments.
When ideas are considered solely in themselves and not
taken to be connected to anything else, they can’t be false;
for whether it is
•
a goat that I am imagining or
•
a chimera,
either way it is true
that I do imagine it
. Nor is there falsity
in the will or the emotions; for even if the things I want are
wicked or non-existent, it is still true
that I want them
. All
that is left—the only kind of thought where I must watch out
for mistakes—are judgments. And the mistake they most
commonly involve is to judge that my ideas resemble things
outside me. Of course, if I considered the ideas themselves
simply as aspects of my thought and not as connected to
anything else, they could hardly lead me into any error.
Among my ideas, some seem to be
•
innate, some to be
•
caused from the outside, and others to have been
•
invented
by me. As I see it,
•
my understanding of what a
thing
is,
what
truth
is, and what
thought
is, derives purely from my
own nature,
·
which means that it is innate
·
;
•
my hearing a
noise or seeing the sun or feeling the fire comes from things
outside me; and
•
sirens, hippogriffs and the like are my own
10

